\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename anvl.info
@settitle ANVL

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* ANVL: (anvl).     A general-purpose task execution tool.
@end direntry

@macro lee{DIR, PREFIX}
  @node Invokation \PREFIX\
  @section Invocation
  @lowersections
    @include \DIR\/cli_param.texi
  @raisesections

  @node Environment variables \PREFIX\
  @section Environment Variables
  @include \DIR\/os_env.texi

  @node All Configurable Values \PREFIX\
  @section Index of All Configurable Values
  @lowersections
    @include \DIR\/value.texi
  @raisesections

  @node Project Configuration \PREFIX\
  @section Project Configuration
  @lowersections
    @include \DIR\/value.proj.texi
  @raisesections

  @node API Reference \PREFIX\
  @section API Reference
  @lowersections
    @include \DIR\/app.texi
  @raisesections
@end macro

@macro pconf
  Project configuration:
@end macro

@c %**end of header
@copying
A general-purpose parallel task execution tool.

Copyright @copyright{} 2024-2026

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

@end copying

@titlepage
@title ANVL
@subtitle A general-purpose parallel task execution tool
@author  k32
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ANVΛ

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

ANVL is a general-purpose task planning and execution tool,
that aims to be conceptually simple, universal and flexible.

ANVL solves the problem of transitioning a system into a desired state step-by-step,
using parallelism when possible.
It is meant as an alternative to build tools like @command{make},
as well as system administration tools like @command{ansible},
but it takes a different approach focusing on @i{conditions} and @i{preconditions},
expressed in a simple DSL based on Erlang.

@html
@quotation Note
Note: this is an online version of the ANVL documentation,
which is also available in GNU Info format.

Press @key{?} to get tips about navigating this website.
@end quotation
@end html

@node Concepts
@section Concepts

@subsection Conditions and preconditions

@emph{Condition} is the basic building block of ANVL plugins and projects.
In a very abstract sense,
ANVL condition is a specially implemented Erlang function that ensures that state of the system satisfies certain criteria,
for example:

@itemize
@item A project has been compiled from sources
@item A system package has been installed
@item A process, container or a VM has been started
@item A server has been provisioned
@item ...
@end itemize

@emph{Satisfying} a condition means checking whether it already holds for the system,
and running a subroutine transferring it to the desired state otherwise.

Conditions are defined using @code{MEMO} macro,
which stands for ``memoize''.
It has the following syntax:

@example
?MEMO(condition_name, Arg1, Arg2, ..., ArgN,
      begin
         <Body>
      end).
@end example

Body of the condition can contain arbitrary Erlang code,
that has the following properties:

@enumerate
@item
It returns a boolean,
indicating whether or not it has produced side effects changing the system.

It returns @code{false} if the system state already satisfies the expectations,
and no changes were made.
Otherwise, it can run a subroutine that transfers the system into the expected state.
When it succeeds, boolean @code{true} is returned,
indicating presence of side effects.

@item
It throws an exception when the system cannot be transferred into the desired state for any reason.

The recommended way to raise an exception is via @code{?UNSAT(FormatString, [FormatArgs...])} macro.
@end enumerate

Conditions are memoized:
ANVL guarantees that body of the condition is executed at most once for each unique set of arguments.
It means, for example,
that if compilation of some module is required by multiple tasks,
the module will be recompiled only once.

By default, all conditions are executed concurrently.

@cindex Preconditions
Conditions can depend on each other.
Such dependencies are called @emph{preconditions}.

ANVL doesn't require a preliminary scheduling stage to build and analyze the dependency graph.
Instead, any condition can invoke any precondition at any time,
making the system very flexible.
Precondition dependency graph is updated dynamically when a condition calls a built-in @link{anvl_condition:precondition/1, precondition} function,
as demonstrated by the example below:

@example
?MEMO(foo, Arg,
      begin
        is_foo_changed(Arg) andalso
          begin
            rebuild_foo(Arg),
            true
          end
      end).

?MEMO(bar, N,
      begin
        precondition([foo(I) || I <- lists:seq(1, N)])
      end).
@end example

Note that with an exception of @code{?MEMO} macro used to define functions @code{foo} and @code{bar},
bodies of conditions use standard Erlang.

ANVL is optimized for the happy path:
problems with the dependency graph (loops, missing dependencies) are detected asynchronously,
when ANVL recognizes that the system cannot make further progress.
When this happens,
ANVL halts and dumps the dependency graph for debugging.
Since this situation should not occur under normal circumstances,
late detection a reasonable trade-off.

@subsection Projects
@cindex Projects

@emph{ANVL project} is a directory containing @file{anvl.erl} file,
also known as the project configuration file.

@file{anvl.erl} is a regular Erlang module, with one notable exception:
it must not contain @code{-module} attribute (and if such exists, it is ignored).
That is because ANVL can work with multiple projects simultaneously,
and to achieve that,
it names project configuration modules automatically.
Because of that, it is not allowed to use @code{anvl:Fun(...)} or @code{fun anvl:Fun/N} syntax to refer to local functions.
If needed, @code{fun ?MODULE:Fun/N} syntax can be used instead.
Other than that,
@file{anvl.erl} is compiled and loaded as a normal Erlang module.

Project configuration modules implement the @link{api/anvl_core/anvl_project,@code{anvl_project}} behavior.

Project referred to by @link{cli_param/root,@option{-d}} CLI argument is called the @emph{root} project.
Project can refer to other projects, known as @emph{child} projects.

@anchor{Project Configuration}
@subsection Project Configuration

The best way to illustrate the structure of an ANVL project configuration file
is to take a look at an abridged @file{anvl.erl} that ANVL uses to build itself:

@example erlang
-include("anvl.hrl").

%% Project configuration:
@link{c:anvl_project:conf/0,conf}() ->
  EmuArgs = "-dist_listen false -escript main anvl_app",
  #@{ @link{value/plugins,plugins} => [@link{Erlc Builtin ANVL Plugin,anvl_erlc}, @link{TexInfo Builtin ANVL Plugin,anvl_texinfo}]
   , @link{value/conditions,conditions} => [@link{conf_example/install,install}, @link{conf_example/static_checks,static_checks}, @link{conf_example/escript,escript}]
   , erlang =>
       #@{ @link{value/erlang/app_paths,app_paths} =>
            ["$@{app@}", "."]
        , @link{value/erlang/escript,escript} =>
            [ #@{ name => anvl
               , emu_args => EmuArgs
               , apps => [lee, typerefl | apps()]
               @}
            ]
        @}
   , [deps, @link{value/deps/local,local}] =>
       [#@{ dir => "vendor/*"
         , kind => otp_application
         @}]
   @}.

%% Condition: ANVL is built and installed in the system:
@anchor{conf_example/install}
?MEMO(install,
      begin
        Prefix = filename:join(os:getenv("HOME"), ".local"),
        precondition([@link{conf_example/escript,escript()}]) or
          install(Prefix, "$@{prefix@}/bin/anvl", anvl_fn:rootdir(["anvl"]), 8#755)
      end).

%% Condition: ANVL executable is built
%% via library condition:
%%  module:
@anchor{conf_example/escript}
escript() ->
  @link{anvl_erlc_escript:created/2,anvl_erlc_escript:created}(anvl_project:root(), anvl).

%% Condition: code passed static checks
@anchor{conf_example/static_checks}
?MEMO(static_checks,
      precondition(
        [ @link{anvl_erlc_xref:passed/1,anvl_erlc_xref:passed}(default)
        , @link{anvl_erlc_dialyzer:passed/1,anvl_erlc_dialyzer:passed}(default)
        ])).

%% A regular helper function
install(Prefix, Template, Src, Mode) ->
  Dest = patsubst(Template, Src, #@{prefix => Prefix@}),
  newer(Src, Dest) andalso
    begin
      @{ok, _@} = file:copy(Src, Dest),
      ok = file:change_mode(Dest, Mode),
      true
    end.

%% List of applications and plugins included in the distribution:
apps() ->
  [anvl_core, anvl_erlc, anvl_git, anvl_texinfo, anvl_hex_pm, anvl_rebar3].
@end example

Let's break it apart:

@code{conf/0} callback returns project configuration as a tree of nested Erlang maps.

Note: notation @code{#@{[foo, bar, ...] => quux@}} is a shortcut for
@code{#@{foo => #@{bar => #@{... => quux ...@}@}@}}.

The configuration of any project includes two standard options:

@itemize
@item @link{value/plugins, [plugins]},
a list of ANVL plugins used by the project.
ANVL can automatically install the plugins before loading the project.

@item @link{value/conditions, [conditions]},
a list of top-level conditions defined by the project.
It is possible to invoke them by passing their names as CLI arguments to the @command{anvl} executable,
for example:
@command{anvl install static_checks}.
@end itemize


Groups of values can be repeated in the configuration,
as seen in the case of @code{[deps, local]} above.
In this case each configuration sub-tree appears as an element of a list.
Another example could look like this:

@example erlang
  #@{ [deps, @link{value/deps/git,git}] =>
       [ #@{ id => my_awesome_dependency
          , repo => "https://git.savannah.gnu.org/git/my_awesome_dependency.git"
          , ref => @{branch, "master"@}
          @}
       , #@{ id => another_dependency
          , repo => "https://git.savannah.gnu.org/git/another_dependency.git"
          , ref => @{tag, "1.0.0"@}
          @}
       ]
  @}
@end example

Project configuration is statically checked against the plugins' schema.
ANVL reports readable errors to the user when necessary configuration parameters are missing or wrongly typed.

Another feature of the ANVL configuration file is the ability to define custom logic in place,
as seen with conditions like @code{static_checks/0} and helper functions like @code{install/4}.

@anchor{Project Configuration Override}
@subsection Project Configuration Overrides

@code{conf_override/1} callback of the root project module allows to override configuration of any child project.

The return value is a @emph{configuration patch}:
a list of operations applied to the child configuration.
There are two operations:
@code{@{set, Key, Value@}},
that replaces the value associated with the key,
and @code{@{rm, Key@}},
that resets the value associated with the key to the default or deletes it.

@example erlang
@link{c:anvl_project:conf_override/1,conf_override}(ChildProject) ->
  case filename:basename(@link{anvl_project:dir/1,anvl_project:dir}(ChildProject)) of
    "some_project" ->
      %% If project is located in a directory ending with "some_project",
      %% apply an override:
      [ @{set, [erlang, bdeps], [some_app]@}
      , @{rm, [erlang, escript, @{some_escript@}]@}
      , ...
      ];
    _ ->
      []
  end.
@end example

@subsection Plugin

A @emph{plugin} is an Erlang/OTP application containing a module that implements the @link{api/anvl_core/anvl_plugin,@code{anvl_plugin}} behavior.

ANVL comes with a number of built-in plugins,
sufficient for bootstrapping other plugins:

@itemize
@item @ref{Erlc Builtin ANVL Plugin,Erlc},
for building and statically checking Erlang applications.
@item @ref{Git Builtin ANVL Plugin,Git},
for cloning git repositories.
@item @ref{TexInfo Builtin ANVL Plugin,TexInfo},
for building documentation in TexInfo format.
@item @ref{hex.pm Builtin ANVL Plugin, Hex.pm},
a lightweight client for @url{hex.pm} package repository.
@item @ref{Rebar3 Builtin ANVL Plugin, rebar3},
a @url{https://www.rebar3.org/, rebar3} compatibility layer.
@end itemize

@link{API Reference ANVL, anvl_core} application provides functionality that allows projects to load the plugins on demand,
deals with configuration, CLI interface, documentation, etc.
It also contains a number of utility functions to aid plugin development.

Plugin configuration is split into two parts:

@enumerate
@item
@cindex tool configuration
@emph{Tool configuration},
that is controlled by the user running @command{anvl} command,
and can be set via CLI arguments and environment variables.
Tool configuration is site-specific and global.

@item
@cindex project configuration
@emph{Project Configuration},
that is set by ANVL projects via @link{c:anvl_project:conf/0, anvl_project:conf/0} callback.
ANVL keeps such configurations separate for each project.
The root project can override configuration of its dependencies.
@end enumerate


Note: since ANVL is implemented in Erlang,
most built-in plugins are in some way related to it.
But that does not mean that ANVL's purpose is limited to building Erlang code,
or building code.
We'll illustrate it in the next section:

@subsection Example: building C code

Let us demonstrate that this rather abstract approach is sufficient to replace a traditional build system.
In this example we'll define an ANVL project compiling C code into an executable.

First, let's declare a condition @code{source_compiled},
that is satisfied when the object file exists and is newer than the source file
or after compiling the source file with GCC.

@example erlang
-include("anvl.hrl").

?MEMO(source_compiled, Src, Obj,
      begin
        @link{anvl_lib:newer/2,newer}(Src, Obj) andalso
          @link{anvl_lib:exec/2,anvl_lib:exec}("gcc", ["-c", "-o", Obj, Src])
      end).
@end example

ANVL framework does not assume anything about the nature of conditions,
it only concerns with the presence of side effects.
Here, @code{newer} is a library function that compares modification times of the files (similar to @command{make}),
but the user is free to implement any change detection,
for example using hash comparison.

Next, let's define a condition that ensures that the target executable is built and up-to-date:

@example erlang
?MEMO(executable_built,
      begin
        Executable = "build/hello",
        Sources = filelib:wildcard("c_src/*.c"),
        Objs = lists:map(fun obj_name/1, Sources),
        @link{anvl_condition:precondition/1,precondition}([source_compiled(Src, obj_name(Src)) || Src <- Sources]) or
          newer(Objs, Executable) andalso
          anvl_lib:exec("gcc", ["-o", Executable | Objs])
      end).

obj_name(Src) ->
  @link{anvl_lib:patsubst/2,patsubst}("build/$@{basename@}.o", Src).
@end example

Finally, setting @code{conditions} project configuration will let ANVL framework know that @code{executable_built/0} function is a condition that can be invoked by the user:

@example erlang
conf() ->
  #@{ conditions => [executable_built]
   @}.
@end example

Now running @command{anvl executable_built} command in the project directory will satisfy the condition with the same name.
(Running @command{anvl} without arguments will satisfy the first condition in the list.)

While this may look verbose at first, it opens up some possibilities.
Using a full-fledged programming language to define conditions gives access to proper data structures and algorithms,
and allows to encapsulate build rules into reusable modules with well-defined interfaces.

@subsection ANVL versus traditional build systems

A traditional build system is a program that automatically solves the following problems:

@itemize
@item Build targets that have not been built
@item Re-build targets that are out-of-date
@item Do not rebuild targets that are up to date
@item Build targets that depend on each other in sequence
@item Build independent targets in parallel
@end itemize

Typical build systems solve this problem using concepts of source, target and rule.
Source and target are (usually) file names, and rule is a subroutine that takes the source files and produces the target file(s).
Most build systems have a standard way of checking whether the target has to be rebuilt, based on comparison of file modification times or hashes.
Dependencies between the targets are encoded in the build recipe as a graph.
This way of doing things works very well as long as build system only works with files,
but falls short when it’s no longer the case.

ANVL's conditions, in contrast, are not tied to the file system or anything concrete.

Additionally, traditional build systems usually mix several concepts together:

@itemize
@item Dependency resolution
@item Checking for updates
@item Resource management (-j flag)
@end itemize

In contrast, ANVL presents these as independent library primitives.

@macro anvl-custom-conditions
  Select conditions from the @link{value/conditions,[conditions]} list of the root project.

  If the user did not explicitly specify any conditions to satisfy,
  then ANVL will run the first condition from the @link{value/conditions,[conditions]} list.

@end macro

@node Installation
@section Installation

The following section describes how to install ANVL into the system.

System dependencies:

@itemize
@item
@emph{Erlang/OTP},
a runtime used by ANVL.
@item
@emph{Git} version control system,
for dowloading external plugins from Git repos.
@item
@emph{GNU Info},
for displaying help.
@item
@emph{GNU TexInfo},
for building documentation.
@end itemize

The recommended way to install ANVL is to build it from source.
Download the source code and run @code{./bootstrap.escript} script in the source root.
It will bootstrap ANVL and install it locally for the user.

Since ANVL doesn't have any external dependencies except those listed above,
the whole procedure is quick and usually takes around 10 seconds.

@lee{anvl_core,ANVL}

@include anvl_erlc/doc/chapter.texi
@include anvl_git/doc/chapter.texi
@include anvl_texinfo/doc/chapter.texi
@include anvl_hex_pm/doc/chapter.texi
@include anvl_rebar3/doc/chapter.texi
@include anvl_otp_install/doc/chapter.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@printindex cp

@bye
